By Mathew Nyaungwa On 6
June 2014, President Robert Mugabe branded his then information minister,
Jonathan Moyo, a “devil incarnate”. He
also chastised him for appointing editors of state-owned newspapers who were ‘sympathetic’
to the opposition. Speaking
at the funeral wake of Nathan Shamhuyarira, the President said Moyo – whom he
had re-appointed as minister of information in 2013 following his 2005
dismissal – was using newspapers to sow divisions. “I
am saying this because all the men that we had, who were leading the
newspapers, were fired and replaced by those from the MDC. You were all
thinking you had a trusted person,” he was quoted as saying by local media referring
to Moyo. Mugabe
said his minister was also trying to use his “knowledge and intellectual ideas”
to destroy Zanu-PF. The
President was not done with Moyo, as he continued shellacking him with a
political rod at the burial of Shamhuyarira on 7 June 2014. "We
now have weevils in our midst. Zanu-PF has weevils within its ranks,” Mugabe
told mourners. “It is not your own little ideas about how you
can beat so and so. “We are telling the people we must be one, we
must be united in agriculture, in mining….we must organise our people to take
advantage of these resources. “Your
publicity must go in that direction; let them know what they must do for
themselves…encourage the people to be organised, don’t plant seeds to divide
the people.” Several
commentators claimed at the time that Moyo, who was believed to have played a central
role in the 2013 massive Zanu-PF electoral victory, had been used and discarded
like a messy condom (yuck!). They
wrote his political epitaph and were quick to cite his previous on and off
relationship with Mugabe as evidence that he was not safe from dismissal. However,
the man, like a proverbial phoenix, rose again as he continued as the
information minister, much to the chagrin of those who wanted him relegated to
the political necropolis. Moyo
was also involved in another political drama last year when he decided to stand
as an MP for Tsholotsho North, a seat he had lost to the MDC-T in 2013. He had
been a non-constituency MP. Moyo
was sworn in as an elected MP in June 2015 when he retained his Tsolotsho North
seat and pundits claimed that this technically meant he lost his cabinet
position and could not continue serving as information minister on the basis of
the change in the premise under which he was appointed. Others
claimed he had been fired. However,
again, he came back, albeit in a different portfolio – higher and tertiary education. Last
January, Mugabe’s spokesperson George Charamba, who is also the information
permanent secretary, subtly fired salvo at Moyo and the so-called G40 grouping allegedly
opposed to Vice-President Emmerson Mnangagwa succeeding Mugabe. “With
their little minds and [they] think baldness is age, it isn’t,” he said in a
radio interview with ZiFM and SFM at State House on 28 January, 2016. “There
is one tragedy of those little fellas, and I call them little fellas, they
confuse media skills with social skills. They think they can scale up the
political ladder by tweeting without knowing they are tweeting themselves to
eternity. “…they
will come to grief, they will come to grief, get it from me and I am not
speaking as a permanent secretary. I am speaking as President Mugabe’s Press
Secretary.” Its
nine months after this rebuke and Moyo currently stands accused of misusing Zimdef
funds and pundits are convinced that the professor will soon come to grief as
Charamba threatened. However,
it is my humble submission that its naïve to think that the self-confessed
Robin Hood of our time is staring political hades. One
doesn’t need to dust archived news articles to see how bigwigs accused of being
corrupt were dealt with. Earlier
this year, the media, including the state-owned newspapers, revealed the awful
abuse of systems at Zesa, the country’s power utility, where tenders were allegedly
awarded to people of questionable repute under Energy minister Samuel Undenge’s
watch. The
minister was accused of putting pressure on Zesa to pay controversial businessman
Wicknell Chivayo more than $5 million for a solar project in Matabeleland South
without necessary guarantees to ensure that public funds were ring-fenced. Did
anything happen to the minister? Zilch! So Moyo
is not an exception, even if the allegations of fraud and money-laundering are
proven true. His
political career is far from receding like his hairline as he is an asset to
the ruling party, even though some party comrades dislike him. Zanu-PF
needs its best brains, including that of Moyo, ahead of the forthcoming watershed
elections. I
know some readers think I am fighting in the corner of Moyo, far from it, he doesn’t
even know me. You
don’t need to be a Moyo praise-singer to conclude that nothing will happen to
him, unless Mugabe himself decides to let him go, as the appointing authority. Former
Vice President Joice Mujuru sensationally revealed to a UK paper earlier this
year that Mugabe keeps files on his ministers’ transgressions to control them
and not for prosecution. “He
keeps files on everybody,” she was quoted as saying. Even
Moyo told the late Heidi Holland in her book, Dinner with Mugabe, that the President’s way of “trying to keep me
on board was by threat rather than persuasion”. So,
those who see the higher and tertiary education minister as finished following the
Zimdef scandal need to calm down and face reality. The
puffed-up professor, like other political elites accused of siphoning public
funds, is not going anywhere. If
anything, he will work like a Trojan horse for the ruling party come 2018, lest
his file is opened by those with real power. What
we are witnessing are just toothless factional dogs barking from their factional
kennels. The
only thing that can get him arrested or fired is when he openly challenges Mugabe’s
power and the professor is not an out-and-out idiot to do that as he does with Vice
President Emmerson Mnangangwa. 